[Music]
hello good evening and sorry for the
slight delay
it's time for the Express ad again and a
lot of you are familiar with with a are
purchased for those who aren't it's the
express groups own way of
pulling in people of interest calling
people who have who are doing things who
are in the process of doing things which
have a fundamental impact on our lives
and some really fundamental things you
know some of our guests are very special
we bring you we brought you actors we
brought you musicians politicians some
former presidents of India I've been
here and with every guest we hope to
interact to chat with them to draw them
out and essentially sort of leave this
place a little wiser a little more
informed than we are at the start of it
and it's a pleasure today to welcome dr.
Siddharth Mukherjee to add a very warm
welcome Siddharth
dr. mukajee is based in the u.s. now
he's an oncologist he's a physician he's
a researcher he's a scientist and
perhaps best known for for most of us
here and outside for his Pulitzer
winning tribe oook on cancer the the
biography of cancer and more recently
the book Jean and intimate history but
other than that he's a Rhodes Scholar
he's an associate professor of medicine
at Columbia yeah all right so I'll cut
cut that and essentially what interests
us with dr. mukajee is of course his
path-breaking fundamental research that
he's engaged in his ideas on you know
the history of medicine that he talks
about the history of the disease and the
work that he does which is attacked the
boundaries of medicine science and
culture so we hope to explore some of
those intersections and things in our
conversation with him and what's also
really interesting with dr. mukajee is
for a lot of us who are trapped in this
binary of science and
humanities so you know he's in some
sense is the perfect bridge and we hope
that you will help us on that journey of
a lot of us were non specialists and
do things so may I request my colleague
pyrometer Chakravarthi to kicked self
Thank You Seema
I'm going to start the conversation dr.
mukajee by asking you about your writing
you've had a lot of very insightful
books from writers like Oliver Sacks of
course
Atul Gawande Paul Calliope what does
writing mean to you is there some sort
of a release
first of all thank you for inviting me
can I be heard in the back yes no yes
okay great
so
for me
the writing is a form of thinking I
write to think some people think to
write I'd like to think
it is a mechanism for me to lay down on
a page and organize by laying down on
the page some ideas about who we are
some ideas about where we're going
and
perhaps the illuminating thing that
we've discovered actually
virtually all physician writers have
discovered is that in fact medicine
allows you to do this in a way that
virtually no profession does no other
kind of calling does
the intimacy that you can share with
what it means to be a human being today
now
that intimacy is
extraordinarily revealed my medicine not
ordinary revealed but extraordinarily
revealed my medicine and we've in
becoming writers we're really sort of
exercising all of us from Oliver who
passed away as you know last year
certainly me Atul Gawande Pokal Anita
who also sadly as you very well know
passed away we're all trying to explore
the same kind of questions that any
writers are trying to explore I think
questions about
who we are what is it like to be to have
a particular intimacy with with dying
what is it like to live what does it
feel like
what does it mean what does it feel like
to heal
what what it was it feel like when you
fail to heal
what is it like when you encounter some
wonderful wondrous thing about nature
what if what are the limits of knowledge
like what are the why we fail in
knowledge what are the lacunae in human
knowledge were the consequences of
losing sight
what do they feel like to have wisdom
and what does it feel like to fail in
having wisdom so what's interesting is
these questions of course fundamental
you know the fundamental they're I mean
obviously they the physician writer of
all physician writers Chekhov
began with these questions and he became
a novelist it turns out that the
richness of medicine allows us to ask
all of these questions
all the time and that's that's my
process really
dr. mukajee perhaps every generation
sort of feels that they're the cusp of
something really big and you know this
is finally going to be the moment when
sci-fi films and novels and everything
will come true but is there something
special about today's times in our times
with AI with genetics with a whole range
of things happening that we are actually
at that moment where it'll probably
never be the same again
well so I think I'll tell you what what
the special features for this generation
are and I'll tell you I mean whether
they become you know whether this
generation draws a strong line in the
sand or doesn't is not relevant to me
what I'll tell you what the special
features are because they are indeed
quite special
one is that over the last four or five
years we've acquired technologies
to change and interrogate not just
change but to interrogate the human
genome with a kind of facility that we
didn't have before
in other words that two things that are
coming out of this
one thing is that
we were struggling as you very well know
we were struggling in medicine in
biology in the sciences to explain the
nature of human variation why do you
look different from from me why is your
biological feature medical fate
different from mine why does a young
woman have breast cancer another young
woman does not why does my child suffer
from one business another child does not
we knew that there were genetic
components they're not the only
components we knew they were powerful
genetic components to this but we didn't
know what those components were
we now are beginning to know those
components and often they might have not
one gene but may have a hundred may have
200 and our computational power our
knowledge our power of knowledge was at
its at its very limit but we seem to
have now crossed into a new arena of
limits I
call this reading the process of reading
it's
simultaneously
exhilarating but very dangerous and I've
written about its dangers I will come to
that in a second there's a paper
published about a month ago which uses
AI alcapurrias in a second but uses AI
and genetics to predict human height
this was unpredictable before we had we
knew that height was highly heritable
that in fact we knew that obviously tall
parents tend to produce tall children
shorter parents tend to produce short
children this has been observed since
time immemorial but there was no
algorithm that would allow us to predict
the height of a child or a person based
on genetic information alone I should
say this this only applies when you lift
away environmental constraints such as
nutrition so in I should say that in
nutrition replete societies there was no
algorithm that would predict human
height this paper basically as of the
last
six to eight weeks predicts human height
based on genetic information alone -
about half a cent
so you could say well do we really care
about this absolutely we care because
you could now predict as an academic
exercise you could predict your unborn
child's height and you could say well do
we care about that absolutely we care
because the next step is you could
predict your unborn child's features you
could predict your unborn child's hair
color and slowly you begin to edge into
territory that's morally quite dangerous
you could predict their future risk of
illness you could predict their future
risk of having a neurodegenerative
disease you could predict the future
risk of them having autism these are all
heritable illnesses moderate to
marginally heritable and there seems to
be no limit as long as the features are
heritable we seem to have be able to
capture that information using genetics
and computational technologies including
AI
that's reading
writing takes a deeper step into the
into the what I call the exhilarating
abyss of human biology
writing means that we also have the
capacity just begin to change the
information you can now again based on
technologies discovered about five to
six years ago which we are using a lot
in our own laboratories we're doing is
actually daily we're changing human
genetic information
we can change now on really on demand I
should say we can change on demand I
think it's not an exaggeration to say
virtually any gene of choice
in the human and we can probably change
it in a human embryo
probably more than one
any gene of choice we can certainly
delete
jeans you can inactivate a gene like
Braca one which will in a human embryo
or or a sperm producing cell or an egg
producing cell you can almost certainly
delete a gene that might predispose you
to breast cancer by the end of next year
we will begin to know how easy or
difficult it is to replace them deleting
is not a problem replacing it completely
with the new information is is a
threshold we're about to cross that
threshold you can decide whether that's
a line in the sand or not I think it is
so that's writing reading writing and
the third piece you referred to is AI
you know a I was AI is a complex view
they're written about it recently quite
extensively I wrote a big piece in The
New Yorker about it's been widely
circulated quite quoted I have some
strong reservations about it but as far
as AI is concerned
this will give you very quickly what
what the field refers to what it means
so
in AI
we are
using we're learning to use
algorithms in computers that
us simulate or are similar to the nature
of human learning
now how does a child learn to recognize
or discriminate between a dog a wolf and
a cat
importantly you don't give a child a
rulebook you don't say this is the rules
of dog this is a rules of cat this is
the rules of wolf right that's not how a
child learns a child learns through an
experiential process in which they're
exposed to these three categories and
they learn to bin animals based on some
features into category of dog wolf and
cat they make mistakes you correct them
and this process iterates over and over
again and through the iterative process
of feature recognition
learning algorithms in our brain we
think this we don't know this learning
algorithms in our brain begin to attach
what you might describe as connection
weights weights and connections if the
snout is this long it should be up in
the dog and wolf category versus the cat
category if the ears are this long and
if it's combined with some other
features so children basically then
extract from images features and they
use these features to build a kind of
neural map and network and they
organizes information not based on a
rulebook as I said they don't tell you
rules for dog and cat in fact if you
query the child again and say well what
are the rules that define dog versus
Catholic often can't tell you they can't
say here are the rules snout has to be
117 centimeters ears after me bla bla
bla a child won't be able to do but that
child knows exactly how to bin dogs cats
vs. wolves now imagine building a
computational architecture which
captures knowledge in this manner our
old computational architectures were
based on rulebook kind of learning we
would tell computers here a set of rules
and computers were very good at it they
could organize sets of rules and if you
gave them rules if you gave them a kind
of if-then-else statement if it has ears
and it has hair and this happens it must
be a dog if it's this color it must be
that bla bla bla bla bla bla but in in
with deep learning and with neural
networks you don't supply the rules you
supply experiences you supply a
mechanism for the machine to acquire its
own knowledge structure and overtime
just like a child learns we think the
machine learns in the same way now the
interesting thing about it is that just
like a child learns and then begins to
use that information in powerful ways
you can present it with complex problems
the child and the child can now start
solving the complex problems just based
on its
heuristic or experiential learning the
machine can do that too so to give you
an example coming back to the height
human height problem
the machine was really fed were all that
really was fed into the machine was
the genetic information of five hundred
thousand or seven hundred thousand
individuals and what their actual
Heights were and the Machine figured out
really by itself in a process that's
opaque to us the Machine figured out how
to correlate a particular genetic
combination with the height now you can
imagine what else we could do with this
it could figure machine could figure out
for instance
whether you're related or unrelated in
other human being just like a child can
figure it out
but now you begin to you now you begin
to talk about the exhilerating of this
on one hand you can do powerful things
for instance predict a woman's risk of
breast cancer man's risk of prostate
cancer
potentially treat them before they have
the cancer these are powerful wonderful
things to have on the other hand you
could do things that are that edge
towards
morally ethically complex territory you
could ask machines to figure out by
themselves
how to profile human beings
you could ask them to figure out
things that we are uncomfortable with
classify us classify faces
search the web and find information
about ourselves which we are not willing
to disclose otherwise
search our searches and
figure out things psychometrically about
us that we're not willing to disclose
otherwise which we have which happened
recently as you very well know in the
news search this room as we sit and
figure out in its with its own metrics
who the wealthy are and who the non
wealthy are and target something to the
wealthy versus a non wealthy and so
forth I can keep giving you examples
that are more and more and more
make us more and more and more deeply
uncomfortable
so if I were to identify
three technologies
drive cars
if I were to identify three technologies
or two technologies two arenas where
we're drawing strong land lines in the
sand about what human future looks like
it would be reading and writing genes
and it would be artificial intelligence
and just to finish up it's the
combination of these two things it's
when computers begin to read us when we
rather than becoming the supervisors
become the subjects of our robot
overlords when we become the subjects
that's when I
suspect for all of us that's when our
level of discomfort rises and let it be
clear we are already the subjects this
line has already been crossed we saw it
recently politically in the in the
news that's been circulating everyone
knows about Cambridge analytical that is
the first step of using humans as
subjects of deep learning
let me emphasize again we could see how
powerful this could be in medicine we
are now actually our laboratory in
collaboration with other laboratories is
building a way to survey prostate
cancers using just computational
technologies alone so I'll give you an
example
in cancer
we get biopsies we read the biopsies and
we say you know this looks
obviously this is cancerous but this
looks like a less aggressive cancer we
could read another biopsy and says you
know say you know this is still a cancer
this looks like a very aggressive cancer
obviously we will treat a man or a woman
with the aggressive cancer differently
and the man with the woman at the end of
then cancer differently but we don't do
very well we don't do very well our
capacity is still quite limited what if
we big what if we allowed what if we
fused our brains with our computational
technologies and it would allow us to
discriminate between the aggressive and
the non aggressive cancers in a much
more powerful way we would be able to
our sophistication enable to being able
to treat men and women children with
cancer would be vastly increased this is
what we're trying to do
imagine I often give the example of this
pathologist who typically reads your
specimens
when you train a young pathologist I'm a
young man a woman in your training in
pathology she begins with a case study
of zero right the first case that she
reads moves from case study of zero to
case study of one a
computer an algorithm when it it begins
with a case study of 500 million right
because you've fed already and the next
case is 5 million and 1 so if you had to
pit the skills of one versus the other
you can imagine which one I would choose
we aren't there yet but we are feeding
as we speak actually while we do this in
out in Seattle we are feeding about a
thousand specimens into into algorithms
to see so they'll they'll start with a
thousand it'll go to ten thousand will
go to a million and then we'll see
we all believe I think
thoughtful people working in the field
believe that these that human
intelligence allows us to do things that
these computational technologies just
don't have we can we identify until now
we identify exceptions better than we
identified rules humans are very good at
identifying exceptions
humans can push red buttons when
computers cannot push red buttons we
think
but it's hard to know things might
change in the near future to make quick
one before paramita scares the bejesus
out of everyone
is you know you said that you're already
we're already reading and doing the
writing as well right and you're in a
position to do that are we in a position
to change things for a set individual or
have you reached the point where you can
do it when the information will be
transmitted across generations - so can
we edit away some things completely yeah
so that's an important distinction it's
a bright line distinction so there are
two kinds I would say if you're talking
about genetic changes genetic
engineering there are three arenas that
need to be distinguished and it's
important to think about the three
arenas separately obviously technology
moves between them but they're three
arenas and every time someone talks
about genetic technologies engineering
we should divide it up into three arenas
so the first tourney now I'll call
somewhat jokingly I'll call all other
species the rest of them that's a little
bit like saying that you know the world
is divided into cows and non cows but
but the induce thing to say that's right
exactly well that's why I said it but
but
but this there is the whole arena of all
other species the reason I'm saying this
is that
they're our interventions have already
started and they are the in in in in
those species the attempt is to change
the species in a way that's permanent
and that's transmittable so for instance
this month or next month in florida we
will start doing genetic engineering on
mosquitoes and before you throw up your
hands and alarm remember that
mosquito-borne illnesses are devastating
to human populations malaria dengue
West Nile virus chikungunya
horrible things I'm told that the I'm
told that the mosquito is the one animal
or insect that has no purpose aside from
being a human pest
I
don't know if that's true or not I don't
know how we would know but I don't know
how we would know all of a sudden you
know there's a famous butterfly effect
you know you just you make the
mosquitoes disappear and in three
generations we're gone as well but but
we're certainly going to change
mosquitoes and those will be released
into the wild in fact they're being
released probably in the next month or
so in the wild in Florida they're
contained in an island but that's
happening so by all other species I mean
mosquitoes I mean crops I mean fish all
these species are open for potential
genetic engineering with
in in in in large part many technologies
have to be breached but the fundamental
problems are tractable they're not
solvable immediately but the fundamental
problems lie within tractable reach the
main danger is of course in doing that
our ecological so the main dangers are
biohazard and the main concern there is
human humility we should be humble about
our knowledge or lack of knowledge of
the ecosystem we want to make changes in
the ecological world for good reason I
suspect we could go horribly wrong so we
have to have some mechanisms to tell us
to remind us
how to keep those practices safe we
could choose not to do it at all by the
way
that's all other species
the second category is what has been
called a throughout a technical word but
it should you should know it and then
talk about the word so it is somatic
gene therapy so ma somatic refers to the
body refers to the human body so here we
are making trying to make genetic
changes in cells which are not
permanently moved to the next generation
so let's say you change an individual
someone has a blood disease a genetic
disease in the blood sickle cell anemia
beta thalassemia
and/or other organs tay-sachs disease
cystic fibrosis etc Huntington's disease
here the changes are made in cells there
are some limitations of technology
sometimes you have to find a way to do
it in many cells but fundamentally
speaking these changes are not
transmitted to the next generation
the danger there the main danger there
are the some technological limitations
but the main danger there is
what I would call biological hazard or
unintended consequences what if in doing
so you create a cancer create a leukemia
create in blood create a different kind
of cancer and in so FAR's actually that
it has not been the case with these new
technologies it's actually been
shockingly safe from the standpoint of
having an unintended effect on the
genome what happens down the road we
don't know because these have just been
one year we're just about two three
years into human into human beings
the third arena is obviously the most
complicated and that is so all of the
species somatic engineering third one's
called germline engineering and here you
are changing not just any cell in the
body but cells that make sperm cells
that make eggs or embryos
themselves and here the bright line
distinction is whatever change you make
will be transmitted across multiple
generations
the technological barriers are high
but solvable the hazards are obviously
the bio hazards but now there are strong
moral hazards should we be playing with
our own genomes
we certainly haven't done it in the past
should we have some humility in the face
of the capacity to change our genetic
information
could we have a profound effect on our
selves as a species is this way we did
to self-determine our future should we
stop now
so an International Committee there will
be not one but there will be several
probably dozens of international
committees that will meet
but the first International Committee
met or one of the first international
committees met in about April last year
coincidentally actually I didn't even
notice but it was coincident with the
gene coming out as a book and
coincidentally very much in line with
what I had proposed in the gene
they and surprisingly this committee
said that in fact the first human
experiments with this kind of genetic
change would be permissible
so at least off the gate as it were we
are we have just opened that door we
have said that if
there is a disease which involves
extraordinary human suffering that word
is very important extraordinary human
suffering if there is a disease that
involves truly extraordinary human
suffering that we should be allowed as
human beings as scientists as people who
think we should be allowed to tamper
with the genetic information in a
permanent way to erase the propensity
for the disease I had proposed a couple
of mild encourage you to read what I
wrote in in the gene it's also been
published as articles etc etc
I had proposed that we should have a
couple of more criteria
not just extraordinary suffering but at
least a criteria that this be done in
societies where there is no moral
coercion
that this should be done in societies
where we have some
deep idea that individual freedoms exist
and there is no state mandate to do this
that is obviously a slippery criteria
there you can imagine that you know you
can ask yourself do you live in a course
of society I don't know maybe you do
you're your own feelings about what
coercion is what mandates are
may not be written on in law but may be
acting through passive social
connections
we've seen that happen in other
countries and the danger actually I
would encourage you to read this section
in the gene it also encouraged if you're
deeply interested I would encourage you
to go read the report it's available
online it's called the institution of
Institute of Medicine report on human
genetic or genomic engineering it's
available online it's a long document if
you're dying lis interested you should
read the last three or four pages of it
but it last three or four pages the
author's there was a list of about 50
authors I'm involved with a new one of
new ones that are that is coming out
about 50 or authors wrote as the first
document they said that
that they have real concerns about
human humility as I said before their
real concerns about our humility and
that they have real concerns about
creating a culture where we extinguish
diversity in the name of progress
that they have very strong concerns
about this
particularly in societies where either
there's a state mandate to bear a
certain kind of child or very important
in the Indian context or there is a
personal mandate or a societal mandate
which is passive no one talks about it
isn't in law but we live in a country as
you know very well we're
already a grotesque eugenics project has
occurred and I'm talking about female
infant side or female neglect
in if you leave this auditorium and
travel a few hundred miles from here you
could be in a place where there are
750 women to a thousand men
profoundly abnormal human ratio it has
never been in human history that we have
created societies where there are 800
women to a thousand men
it's something to be ashamed of it is
something to be conscious of but let it
be said that you don't require at least
in this one in this case you did not
require a state mandate to drive a human
population across three four five
generations into a into a pathologically
of normal States there's no state
mandate in fact our state mandates do
not do this
so I not only echo the concerns
that the report had I would say in the
context of countries where there are
passive mandates I would I find them
extremely disturbing
I'm going to take a step back here and
ask you something with all the progress
that is being made in modern medicine do
you feel that as a society we are
becoming averse to the idea of accepting
death as the logical end
you know I think that's but you know
this has been debated a lot I think
certainly a series of physician writers
including me but I told go and they
famously most recently oliver paul
colony 'they
have
tried to remind us to keep a certain
sense of moral balance personal balance
between
understanding the
progress medical progress that's been
made and balancing it against things
like dignity around death
in fact what's interesting about it is
that
in a
in in the united states is
often caricatured as a country where
people are unable to accept that in fact
the use of hospice in the United States
has increased
our understanding of palliative care has
actually deepened among the young and
the elderly in the United States so I
think imagining societies where
progress in medicine is
portrayed in an adversarial relationship
with dying with dignity
is certainly possible we know such
societies exist we can we've certainly
seen them but it's also possible I think
to imagine societies where progress
within medicine is not in an adversarial
relationship with dying that in fact
these two things can
coexist and we'd like that to be India I
think we'd like that to be this country
we would like this country like many
others to have a non adversarial
relationship with medical progress
accepting its ideas accepting what can
be done accepting the capacity to
relieve extraordinary suffering but on
the other hand also allowing enough
space for people young and old to have
dignity around dying I think that's
possible to do it's harder to do it's
the adversarial relationship is easier
to come by you know I'm trying to live
don't don't force me to die that
adversarial relationship is easier to
come by you can imagine it more easily
but there's certainly attempts since I
would say successful attempts to have to
hold both the ideas at the same time
we're trying to do I'm an oncologist
it's something I try to achieve it's not
always possible to achieve in your own
head the the two angels battle each
other
constantly
but I suspect for individuals when when
those two angels have finished their
mutual battle you can often find a
resolution for an individual
you mention oncology is you an
oncologist dr. mukajee and your first
book which really kind of touched a
chord and you you did a biography of the
c-word I mean people were so hesitant to
even talk about cancer it was touching
more lives than it ever did or that we
were aware of and you said something
very interesting that cancer is probably
very different from several other
diseases in the way that it kind of is a
shadow of our evolutionary path or you
know the human body itself so would you
just take us a bit through that thought
about what makes cancer so
difficult and at the same time so
interesting to grapple with as an
oncologist or as a doctor well this has
to do with this site with has to do with
the idea that
more than really any other disease this
could be true for other diseases more
than any other disease
the fundamental mechanism of cancer
builds on
vulnerabilities in our physiology as
humans which are fundamental to being
human in other words the very
process is the very genes that allow us
to become who we are to grow to repair
our wounds to heal ourselves after we're
injured
corruptions of those very genes allow us
also enable cancerous growth
this is a very important idea to drive
vomits of course on one hand a
biological idea of course it has
philosophical and metaphorical
consequences but the consequences are
very clear it is that there is no free
lunch in the human genome that in fact
there are trade-offs and the trade-offs
between growth the natural trade-off of
growth is a one natural trade-off of
growth metabolism
our capacity to be multicellular all the
things that make us who we are
our capacity to resist the depredations
of the environment of injury if you just
flip them over as if it were a card
inevitably lead to cancerous growth
and its consequences are felt across
have already been felt in the West
for certain populations they are being
felt in India there is no doubt in my
mind that cancer will reach what you
might consider epidemic proportions in
India
because of cancer appears in the double
negative it appears when other diseases
such as infectious diseases vanish in
the United States as we've made
important milestone or landmark
conquests against other diseases
up came
cancer and
there is absolutely no we can already
see it we can there's absolutely no
doubt that this will happen in
many countries around the world you
might be surprised to know for instance
that
in places like I know this data for
Tanzania
where you would imagine that the most
that the biggest killers were infectious
diseases those curves are rapidly
shifting the biggest killers are
becoming hypertension cancer heart
disease diabetes
dementia all these illnesses that you
know we didn't grow up really thinking
about perhaps but have become very much
much part of our lives I would wager to
say that in your parents generation in
our parents generations
it still was the c-word in our
generation people who are sitting in
this audience I will guarantee it that
you know someone in your immediate
one step away who has been touched or
killed by cancer
this is the new epidemiology of what is
happening in all parts of the world
India has the third highest number of
cancer patients among women after China
and us are women more susceptible to
cancer
no that's not true so you know if you
look at
susceptibility numbers
they arranged it there's a wide range of
susceptibility numbers but for women and
men you know the incidence of cancer
just how often you get cancer often
cancer Rises ranges in the United States
between one and three one in two and
there it really depends on the subtype
or the or that's really the subtype um
the epidemiology is quite different in
women it's driven really by breast
cancer and other cancers that are common
to men in men it's driven by many other
cancers including prostate and lung but
there's a wide shared connection so
cancers off head and neck colon rectum
etcetera etcetera are obviously common
to both um but I would say overall I
mean there are certain epidemiological
differences maybe there's obviously
certain risks I mean prostate cancer is
a male disease breast cancers mainly for
the most part of female disease men also
get breast cancer rarely
but the numbers are not so out of
comparison that that you have specific
susceptibility does it concern you dr.
mukajee when you come back to India
given our levels and state of Public
Health that yep sorry
what we can expect with cancer kind of
getting to the proportions that you've
outlined it may get to we hear about the
NHS being able to cope with some degree
of success with this and you know other
systems may be Cuba I don't know about
the you know more about the there's more
about the US but what worries you more
about say perhaps the near absence of
public health policies or processes in
India to cope with this well the the
range again if you think about cancer
you have to think about in different
categories or buckets and if you fail to
do that you can get very confused and
really the importance is to not get
confused so the the cancer begins with
prevention cancer prevention that's the
mainstay of cancer therapy and the
mainstay there is that is a that is a
powerfully that is driven by public
health
and
virtually all successful attempts at
cancer prevention have been attempts by
governments this isn't this is far from
a privatized enterprise it has to have
certainly NGOs and advocacy groups can
help but the real onus falls on
governments so in the in India and other
places cancer prevention begins with
limiting carcinogens tobacco is the main
one mainstay of them rampant in India
very poorly controlled and we know from
a whole load of epidemiological data
that it can be controlled there's
nothing endemic about tobacco control
you can actually do it large nations
have been successful in doing it the
effect on human populations has been
vast so but it has to be done it has to
be political will to do it which is
clearly lacking so far here so attempts
have been made but they have to be
really capitalized other examples of
cancer prevention include some degree of
success in vaccination
there are viral cancers of which human
papillomavirus is probably the largest
most common that we can vaccinate
against
and as you know very well despite many
efforts
vaccination for women against human
papillomavirus in this country efforts
have stalled I think that's a that's a
shame because this
the deaths from cervical cancer I mean I
treated many many women with cervical
cancer those are many preventable deaths
it's a real embarrassment and the
rejection of science medical science is
a real embarrassment you know science is
not fake news it is real news for people
the rejection of of this based on
rather flimsy criteria I would say is a
real embarrassment and I hope that this
gets redressed and turned around no
vaccination is going to be without some
degree of
collateral effects that doesn't exist
for any vaccination
but most vaccine for the last for the
large part are safe and in this case
they have the capacity to prevent
disease so I think that would be one
example so there's the bucket of
prevention the onus generally falls on
public enterprise
the second arena which is really tends
to be a public-private collaboration as
it were is in early detection of cancer
so-called secondary prevention or
primary prevention
sorry second prevention in which you try
to detect cancer early
we have not been phenomenally successful
at doing this mammograms are helpful but
they don't really have an massive impact
that's not to say that you shouldn't be
getting mammograms it just is to remind
us that those technologies have
fundamental limitations we're trying to
get better in fact the AI genomics
examples I told you are trying to use
that information to find out who's
likely to be benefit from a mammogram
who's where will be likely to find the
most
dangerous cancers etc we don't do very
much of this at all in India it's
actually quite we're quite quite further
behind even nations like Cuba where
there's a lot of
early detection has actually taken off
quite quite well the third branch of the
third bucket is treatment this is an
arrow it's a funneling system of course
we want to treat the fewest prevent the
most and here of course it is without
saying that we really lack the
infrastructure we don't train
oncologists I don't know how many
oncologists we train what's the number
how many oncologists are we training in
India per year send you how many
oncologists are we training in India per
year
hundreds 200 300 cancer doctors where
the need is on the order of
several thousand actually so there are
some so all of this our capacity to give
therapy appropriate therapy for cancer
is limited by all of this and again
people say gosh you know how can we
train people in this medical field it's
too expensive just to remind you
tamoxifen
is available act
really at a price which makes it just as
affordable as an infectious as an
anti-infective agent as an antibiotic
and its effect on breast cancer can be
transformative tamoxifen is a cheap drug
not every drug is not every cancer drug
is not every kind of cancer therapy is
but tamoxifen is valued of care for
cancer forget about treatment morphine
is a cheap drug
but you can barely get it in India when
my father passed away last year in
October I went from doorstop to doorstop
from pharmacy to pharmacy trying to
relieve his pain with morphine I could
not find I can I could go to the United
States it would take me all of 15
minutes
to myself write a prescription for an
opioid fentanyl morphine etc it would
take have taken me 15 minutes to relieve
his pain as he lay dying it I went from
doorstep to doorstep with the
prescription I couldn't find pain relief
to save his life they said you know give
him tylenol and ibuprofen
so that's that's a problem we need to
solve that problem we've approached
actually we've approached
through several sectors through several
ways we approached the Prime Minister
about this if we want to have a proper
portfolio of ways to treat cancer
we absolutely need chemo therapeutic
drugs we need infusion centers we need
ways to give patients the medicines but
we equally and absolutely need real
palliative care and we cannot get real
palliative care without opioids it is a
disservice to
human beings had a neck cancer you know
invading their teeth
breast cancer that's advanced with
metastases you just cannot be know these
medicines are cheap these are have been
available for decades yes is there a
risk of a you know addictive problems
yes absolutely
have those risks being serious yes
absolutely in the United States they
have been serious in other countries of
the world but
but the but the NHS just to give you one
example other countries coming back to
Cuba have done perfectly well treating
pain severe pain not just cancer related
in my father's case it was related to
his decline and dementia doesn't have to
be cancer related but end-of-life care
requires morphine and it's analogs and
giving end-of-life care in 2018 without
morphine is an embarrassment
so we'll right we'll try again we'll
write to the prime minister again we
have as I say we I have done this myself
I will try again
reminding ourselves that there are
dangers this is not a this is not a
free-for-all but there are several
nations that have managed to do this
without falling into the trap of
releasing addictive substances
among generally young people who don't
should not have access to those
addictive substances clearly dangerous
but there are several nations that have
threaded that needle successfully and
really I mean in 2018 we should not be
treating the elderly in palliative
methods with ibuprofen
know one of the things that you said so
that was very interesting that it's time
to not take science as fake news you
know it's not fake news we've had a
series of kind of events in India as
well you know statements by people in
power people are responsible for Science
and Technology Policy who you know
they've contested Arvind in the most
incredible of ways I mean I'm sure
there's a case for doing that but it's
happened kind of very on-the-fly in in
the US as well there seems to be you
know means science has fake news seems
to have a new lease of life so what do
you do when people who are in policy who
are in positions of power are almost
taking a completely different position
from what they should be to the science
establishment and then you have all
these changes happening and as you said
we're the cusp of very fundamental
change or the coming together of many
technologies so what's the we I don't
know I'd you tear your hair out and you
I mean what were you supposed to do you
use
you hope to use reasoned dialogue to
remind people that there is a that this
is a
long conversation
it is a conversation that has been going
on in human history for now all known
human history
the capacity to use reason
for human emancipation but the capacity
to use reason to interrogate nature to
understand nature has been going on for
a long time and that we won't let them
interrupt this conversation and deviate
this conversation it's not fair to us as
humans of course there are all sorts of
problems we know that unleashed in the
wrong direction there have been excesses
it's important to acknowledge those
excesses and not swipe them under the
carpet
it's simple to talk about them it's
important the lessons from them
in fact one way that both the both my
books can be read are is to remind
ourselves about what the what those
excesses were and could have been we've
seen them in cancer we've been seen them
in eugenics had encouraged people to
read the chapter on eugenics and rima
and remind ourselves that these impulses
are very fundamental their impulses are
in fact present in virtually every
country certainly present in India
so
so on one hand to remind people that
this these are important to err to
understand but on the other hand also
not allow
people to deviate or to
take over a conversation that has gone
on in humans uninterrupted that's one of
the wonderful things about
the Natural Sciences is that when you
use the term
force
you are using the term force in exactly
the same way that Newton Newton used the
term force 400 years ago
when you use the term volume when you
use the term cancer we are trying may
not be true for cancer but we're trying
to use the term exactly the same way
that
someone used it 300 years ago name one
word or name a few words outside the
context of science where you know that
you're using the word today in exactly
the same way that someone used it 300
years ago they're few such words Innings
language and that tells you when the
conversation is successful you can talk
to someone who's been dead for 400 years
as if they were sitting the room you
could have a conversation with Newton
you could say I'm gonna use the word
force and you will understand exactly
what I mean and
therefore I can converse with you across
406 what I use the word triangle
you and I will have no debate about and
I can talk to Pythagoras
what other discipline allows you to do
this so it is important not to interrupt
this conversation it is a powerful
conversation it has errors that support
to acknowledge the errors but it's
probably the most beautiful
conversations we've ever had across
multiple generations
that's not to say that they're all that
the that when words change meaning they
can also be quite beautiful that
different
essentially faith in science can
coincide you've written about Mendel
whose spiritual quest did not hamper his
scientific inquiry
in the in Mendel's case they coincided
it's not clear to me that they can
coincide today actually I'm afraid
that's not close becoming less and less
clear
it depends on what faith you have by the
way
what about you
you know
I've become by me personally speaking
I've been agnostic for a while and
become progressively more agnostic I I
have an interest in helping people I'm
interested in
and
personally speaking I'm interested in
small metaphysical question I'm not
interested in large metaphysical
questions okay I will fail you agnostic
but you know it's not a cop-out yeah
it's a cop-out you know what what am I
supposed to say I mean what's the what's
the what's the opposite of a cop-out
here what's very agnostic
what's the we'll describe to me what the
opposite of a cop-out would be I don't
know what the opposite of cop-out is we
all into something again we kind of opt
into something rather disbelieve with
ferocity or we believe
why'd you have to opt into sometimes not
clear to me okay I would go test you on
that you can I
am an agnostic after all no there's a
wonderful article you tweeted I think it
was this month where I think you kind of
spoke also about the article which you
wrote about your father's last a few
days and you described some of the
morphine journey and the other things
that you dealt with this particular
article talks about of course you know
in the quest of you know when you're
near laboratory and you're looking for
the gene there is this thing that we are
looking for the gene for this and the
gene for that and this describes the
other side of you know I mean it's in a
sense is that very typical and tiring
debate that the nature was not your
thing but as you are you know in the
laboratory and you're looking at this
gene where do you stand on that debate
about how much this gene is going to
actually be responsible for fixing
something giving it direction and how
they're going to be the other things
that I think it termed it the loop out
which is all about environment learning
being schooled etc so you know a lot of
my new work I should say
you know obviously like everyone we're
evolving as thinkers a lot of the new
work that I'm doing has it has a somatic
element you might not know it off the
top my head but I know it I often know
it as I said after I finished writing
that's why I write to figure out what
I'm thinking a
lot of the new work if you if I in fact
I thought about this when I was on my
way here on the flight a lot of the new
work fundamentally has to do with
placing things that we thought were
powerfully would powerfully determine
features of ourselves placing them back
in context placing them back in the
context of ourselves so to give you some
examples I'll tell you how this fits in
I've been thinking a lot about in my own
actually and you know I've my laboratory
then moves this way
I've been thinking a lot about well
we've spent so much time mana maniacally
obsessed with genes that drive the
growth of cancer cells what about
the cells that surround the cancer that
are not cancerous what about the homes
that cancer is build around themselves
what about the environments micro
environments and then what about the
macro environments in which a human
being exists their cancer exists
what about the
so I wrote a big piece called cancers in
the invasion equation which came I was
in The New Yorker which
tries to turn away
from this as I said monomaniacal
obsession with the cell itself and tries
to understand what a how can we put the
cell back into its conte into its micro
environmental context
and in doing so I read work that I
hadn't read before me you know I'd like
to think I'd read everything about all
of this of course I hadn't I read work
by
DW Smithers an English oncologist from
the 9th from the 1930s 40s 50s who wrote
an incredible piece in which he said in
which he wrote cancer is a disease of
cells just as much a traffic jam is a
disease of cars
so you can imagine it's a very powerful
provocation this was a time when
everyone was obsessed with cells and yes
a traffic jam is a disease of cars that
might be correct but it's obviously not
a disease of cars in the sense of in the
sense of the car itself it's about the
context in which the car finds itself
right Smithers got lacerated
they were
written and letters written in the
lancet to reply back to this cancer as a
disease of cells etc etc etc
but we're starting to understand that
that there's some truth to this idea
about to be one more example a kind of
puzzle that we've been thinking about
for a long time breast cancer we know
metastasizes to the liver occasionally
cancers metastasized liver which we
never metastasize to the spleen they're
the same shaped organs same sized organ
that lived next to each other why not
what about one environment makes it very
receptive the other environment not
breast cancer metastasizes to the bones
but it virtually never metastasizes to
your wrists or to your finger no one's
ever heard of breast cancer in your
finger or in your wrist why not why does
it metastasize to hips or spine or other
bones why not other bones so it's a
whole series of thoughts so this comes
brings me back to
my the the piece that I wrote about my
father which has also been widely
circulated and there again I was
thinking about similar questions the
question there is homeostasis what does
it mean how do
beings organisms how do how do they
maintain their sense of balance how do
they maintain senses of cells how do
they resist forces that change
in the context of being themselves how
do we keep things the same and again
it's it goes against this idea of oh you
know we know the elements of change we
know the elements that will change a
body if you give this medicine that will
happen very deterministic way of
thinking also correct but what about the
flip side whether the yang side of that
the yin-yang side of that what if what
about the things that happen which
resist these changes these forces and in
fact we're built that way we're built so
that we aren't sort of we aren't blown
away by a single environmental change
our bodies our physiology ourselves
ourselves our mentors is so again this
work I think is somatically organized I
didn't know it myself actually when I
started writing these pieces I didn't
know it myself but in retrospect in in
there'll be a series of five of them and
they'll be collected we're hoping in a
book maybe where you
but nonetheless we will find ways to
organize these thoughts about
what I call the yang side of
determining deterministic thinking
again matters larger question of how
science is viewed and particularly in
India it's really fascinating that
there's a near obsession with you know
if people being science graduates and
you know opting for science after class
then you perhaps also saw a bit of that
in when you were in school in India but
there is you know other than this you
know but Chhaya - doctor engineer Banega
there is this fascination of gadgets as
well and you know we like digital things
and you don't like analog counters and
all that there is also very touching
disregard to you so the spirit of
inquiry and rationalism and reason
otherwise so how does this kind of get
divorced from this this love for
technology gadgets and fruits of science
if you like without the accompanying
spirit I mean I
don't know I have no idea is that cheap
you find that true in India is that true
is that a common trope that you have a
love for gadgetry but it disregards
don't know is it yeah I mean I don't
know if I took a vote here
there are people fascinated by
technology it's it's results with
science but the other things that follow
with science is scientific temper other
things are do not have the same right
yeah so I the quick answer is I don't
know I have some some humility about
context here I I don't know I would
imagine that
first of all I
think it's a wonderful thing to train
scientists I think it's a wonderful
thing I think
educating so you know I think it's a
wonderful to think to me and
I
think
I think of course there is a sense of
balance that I think people want to
achieve you want to be your physician
your doctor not to be a technocrat right
you don't want to be a you don't want
your doctor to be a to be a gadget man
or a gadget woman you want them to be a
human being and then if they happen to
like goddess that's fine but they want
to want them to be human beings first
but you know I I think
I think I think we should have no shame
in training scientists and engineers I
think it's a great thing as long as you
have
as long as there's your what you're
calling it's a nice phrase as long as
the the temperament the scientific
temperament remains
present but there's you know there's a
kind of and and actually importantly as
long as they as long as the
representation of genders in science it
remains adequate
those are important caveats
but all of this said you know should we
be ashamed that we we are training young
scientists in and you just know it's a
great thing
train more
how did the sciences and the arts come
together in your life
you know I again it's not I didn't
consciously set out to be I mean I had I
think consciously set out to be a writer
at any point of time I like reading
at some point of time I realized in my
own trajectory that I like reading more
than anything else in the world it's my
favorite thing to do there's nothing
more I like to do than reading and so I
thought if that's the case I might as
well write something but at some point
of time you have some degree of self
realization that if I were left alone in
a room for
200 years and if I could read I would be
perfectly happy
and so if you if that's where you're
going I think that I mean the question
often asked is how do you know you're a
writer how do you what what makes you
writer I think you'll learn to write by
reading there's no other means it's the
simplest equation of all
I I like doing it I
think it's a wonderful thing to do
medicine did you always want to be a
doctor
you know it sort of came to me slowly I
there's almost certainly some
reinvention in your own brain about what
you wanted to be no one really knows
what they want to be with you
retrofitted to what you've become if
you're happy and you retrofit it to what
you could have been if you're unhappy
right so then so you have to be a little
bit careful about your own Oh
when someone asks you you know did you
always want to be right it's really what
they're what they're asking you is are
you happy human being or an unhappy
human being right so that so I think it
dawned on me general just slowly I
wanted to be a scientist for a while I
found it exhilarating but somewhat
isolating and so I I think but I suspect
that there's some retrofitting going on
in in that
you're a trained singer right do you
still sing
yes I sing you know we have a band
which is
which sort of does sits at the
intersection of jazz and Indian
classical music I was trained
that's another thing I like to do
but I have you know
the answer is yes the band is sometimes
cacophonous
what's the bad cold it's called job
blues
after the rock joke but also joining
follow me if you don't have any question
right away we can just throw the floor
open to a very eminent audience so my
colleagues here have microphones so may
I request you to please identify
yourself before you ask a question and
please try and avoid asking you know
questions which are very personal about
a particular medical condition which may
have a thing we may not be in a position
to handle kind of a question so should
we start from the ambulance yeah Rena
yeah
please identify yourself yes yeah I'm
Ramanujam I'm a professor in Indira
Gandhi National Open University
was a fascinating
interview my question is when you write
to think more precisely and more clearly
dealing with the subject like cancer
how do you balance between
you were writing and the audience and
the language you use
yeah I mean obviously it's a it's a
tough
place to think in right I
actually
prefer not to think of an audience
that's my personal preference I prefer
to think about writing for myself and to
myself if you're writing to think that's
helpful
it's also helpful because it immediately
identifies things that you don't know
you can tell just like you can tell a
fair musician you know when you struck a
false note before anyone knows it
in the same sense when you write if you
don't have the few lack that the
querying of yourself is the best guide
so I don't think of audience I try to
think of myself as a reader that's the
first
way the second thing is I
think that all good
writing writing to thinking writing to
think whether actually this is in
fiction or nonfiction I wrote a long
piece recently saying that
even within in the world of fiction
everyone is answering trying to answer a
question
in fact when I approach a piece of
writing when I approach a piece of art
I'm always I always start with the
following I say what question is this
trying to solve or answer it's a very
unusual perhaps way perhaps as usual I
don't know but it's my way of
anticipating virtually anything so when
I go and see a painting when I go see a
piece of sculpture my wife's a sculptor
when I go and see
work the first thing that goes through
my brain is what question is this work
trying to answer so it's interesting
exercise throw this out for yourself
what question is the god of small things
trying to answer
there is a question I guarantee it
there's a question that that book is
trying to answer what question is the
suitable boy trying to answer there's
the answer is a question there is a
question
what question is a whatever it is and
this is applied quite broadly to
whatever
element of art you're trying to ask so I
always go back to that what question is
is this something trying to unsaid that
helps me a historian is trying to answer
a question a novel is trying to answer a
question obviously nonfiction writers
try to answer questions
I'm Deepika Magoo wanted to know is
there something in diet that can be said
that it is preventing cancer not right
now we're doing a whole bunch of studies
in fact one will be launched in the net
well we know some things we know that
there's a powerful connection between
obesity and cancer
we've known that for a while but it's
not clear whether the connection is
because of diet or because of genetics
that's an often mistaken idea we don't
know whether the contributor that's
connected is dietary or genetic or
something else could be some other
categories so we know this for a long
time
we also know that
that there are
contributions of
minor carcinogens actually so red meat
is one of them but its contribution is
certainly present but it doesn't add up
to the real incidence of cancer so we
are just about to launch in
collaboration Colombian Cornell and
Harvard are just about to launch really
led by a Harvard group the one of the
first rather comprehensive studies which
will follow men and women with diets
prospectively across we hope tens of
years and some of them are going to be
on a ketogenic diet which we think are
is interesting from the Stanford can we
don't know yet and we'll also do a
simultaneous study of this as a
treatment but it's early days we'll know
soon
Siddarth my name is Nasim Zaidi and
very recently in my job in the Election
Commission I dealt with manifestos
you have detailed the history of
development of gene and genome in your
recent book the gene which I have read
it I read all of your books in fact and
you have said there are three billion
letters in the indeed in the human
genome and only 20,000 have been
discovered so my in that context my
question is or my clarification that I
want to learn from you is what is going
to be the what is going to be three or
four top items of the manifesto of
genome history or genetic research say
in 50 years or 100 years you know
politicians have been used to five years
manifesto but five years is no period in
science so that is my clarification
thank you so
you know what we're trying to do is
again the the aim of the project is to
try to understand human similarity and
difference and try to understand what
how much our DNA contributes to human
similarity and how much it contributes
difference and by difference it can
range from wise you're trivial questions
I think are generally uninteresting but
some people might financially why is
your physiognomy why is your face
different from mine was your nose
different from mine was your hair color
different from mine but but of course
rather profound questions why do you
have a disease and I don't
why do you have a risk of a disease and
I don't etcetera so those are I think
substantial questions we're trying to
answer so the first thing is really in
in our process of trying to understand
this we're trying to understand how to
make sense of human variation and
similarity why are you made like me why
are you unlike me why do you look like
your parents while you'd not resemble
your parents how can we explain the
differences between you and me across
time across space across Geographic
space using our understanding of genes
and the second one I think high on the
manifesto is if we had that information
should we would we could we in that
order
change this information either using
the various methods I've identified so
those would be high on the list reading
and writing
teach philosophy at JNU I was wondering
if you are familiar with Michel
Foucault's writings and how would you
rate your own writings reserved because
it looks that you are trying to create a
social narrator for medicine while
Foucault runs the other way around
actually to deny the pathological or the
pathological as a social construct I
almost see your two ends of the spectrum
would that be a right reading to make
right so you know I obviously have dealt
with in read
fuko's writing a lot he comes in many
times in fact he was very influential to
the writing of the gene
that might even be there certainly
Coates from there's a present there's a
there's a section which actually deals
very much with
fucose ideas about
what would happen or what does happen
when
we regularize or normalize human beings
this goes back to the point that they
actually the Commission made
the IOM did pseudo medicine commission
made about seeking normalcy and the real
concern of diminishing human diversity
that actually that concern arises very
much out of the strand of thought which
was brought to us by
people like by philosophers like
but Foucault vien philosopher is that
the the desire to that that the medical
desire to normalize has to be kept in
check
versus the human desire to maintain and
celebrate that we are different from
each other I'm very inspired by that
idea we're concerned with that idea you
know we come at it as it were through
very different spaces
I'm obviously primarily a doctor
I do think that the different
perspectives are important
but we obviously share I just gave you
some examples of how I've been inspired
by and I share many fundamental
commonalities with a group of
philosophers among whom for cause one I
would say philosophers philosophers who
have concerned themselves very deeply
with
normality and difference and I share
their concerns very much
my name is departmental I teach genetics
I used to teach I'm and I work with GM
crops I want to compliment you for this
wonderful book the gene and I think
every student of biology should read it
because sometimes we teach biology in a
very sectarian way from a very narrow
perspective and you have really caught
up with a very large canvas in your book
my question to you is a very basic one
you know we we know that
mutation is a
deleterious mutation can cause cancer in
mutation can cause disabilities but
mutation is basically the raw material
on which all the life has evolved the
point is that we are accumulating too
many mutations
because natural selection is not
operating the modern medicine is
protecting people from purifying
selection so I believe that there is
inevitability in at least corrective
interventions
otherwise we will be all ending up in
hospitals and the health budgets will
soar so high that no country will be
able to afford it that may be the end of
human so some intervention is required I
would like to know what you think with
all your I think before interventions
are required humility is required and I
think we lack that humility currently I
think
one of the things that distinguishes us
from an
is our capacity to care for the ill
in fact one of the points made in the
book is that
illness
even genetic illness and perhaps
particular genetic illness is a mismatch
between the environment and you
a hairless a hairless man is ill in
Antarctica but very well in Africa just
to give you one example because it's the
climactic you know how you adapt to the
climatic changes
it's important to realize that because
it affords a certain degree of humility
about what illness is now there you're
absolutely right that there's certain
particularly genetic illnesses
where you could where the human mind is
boggled about how those but we can't
create environments really within human
reason to make those individuals
flourish I still think that our primary
responsibility is to give them care this
is a human impulse I think denying that
impulse is to deny what is fundamental
about ourselves
and I would I
I have generally been
an advocate of
humility because our our attempts to
tamper with selection if you haven't
noticed I've gone quite badly
in history so I think the first face of
this if we read history carefully if you
read genetic history carefully should be
humility
rehabilitation Victor McKusick the
greatest of the human geneticists was
extraordinarily concerned with what he
called the genetic industrial complex
not the military industrial complex but
the genetic industrial complex in which
we would try to use reuse
forces of selection natural selection to
recraft the human genome to our
specifications and
he you could not find a deeper believer
in genetics but he was also he founded
the field of human genetics but was also
reminded himself to be extraordinarily
sympathetic and humble in the face of
trying to shape the human genome I would
like to remind ourselves of that again
in it as we move forward so the first
step should be humidity the first step
should be to relieve extraordinary
suffering that's what I believe I
believe that the
it's not clear to me that the forces of
selection have been entirely removed
we're undergoing selection during our
evolution I hope that we can
try to eliminate diseases through
genetic means but I think that the
desire to recreate or craft
human genomes
have been projects that have gone wrong
in history so I feel that we should be
humble in the face of all of that I
heard you mention chance
now how does jazz really help you and
this is a jazz of John Coltrane Miles
Davis oh come from so big names
it's all of that you know I think
obviously the
obviously
it was anyone who's spent some time
thinking about Indian classical music
understands that they're rich
intersections with jazz
I like to think about how these might
have evolved if you imagine music as a
kind of genetic strain it isn't I'm just
saying it as a metaphor
how could these two things of music
which arose in totally different places
have evolved in directions that are
surprisingly similar what does it tell
us about us as humans that we want to
listen to something created on the spot
and we we in and in a culture where
virtually everything is available to us
in a kind of digital or simulacrum we
see images we don't see the real thing
we see and yet we crave
going to a performance where the
performers is right there making music
right there what does it tell us about
ourselves I don't it's a fascinating
idea why did these two places that are
so far away from each other play such a
premium on spontaneity
on mistake making
mutation why is it that we
find that pleasurable why is it we find
I don't know the answers they put their
questions fascinate me
may I please ask a personal question my
name is Anita Cooley you said you didn't
say I think therefore I am but you said
I read therefore I write do you have a
set time for writing or is there some
discipline to your writing if I may ask
there's a discipline to nothing in my
life so that's so true but I was
wondering since
you know I
obviously we are brought and torn in
different directions I try to carve out
time every day if I can do write
something I would probably write
something every day I mean I'll be
polite I think realize that the real the
the real place for writing is editing
you can produce a lot but what you keep
is is what makes a difference between
generally between people who
produce readable writing and people who
produce unreadable writing frankly
so I think anyone who is
it's what you take away from the page
rather than what you leave on the page
that's important so I spend a lot of
time going back going back and going
back and ultimately someone has to pull
the manuscript out of my you know cold
hands before I before it's finally
published so that's my process but I try
to do it every day
hello
I was right sense again how did you know
speak into the microphone yell or shout
I'll repeat your question
give him a new mic
if you were to write science fiction
yeah how would it end I hope in Hope in
Hope or in a dystopian world what do you
see there at the end
I've been actually interesting you asked
I've been toying with the idea of
writing some science fiction
I've been very inspired by science
fiction I've written I've read science
fiction all my life I'm particularly
interested in science fiction I've
always been in science fiction and
the point is you know I would
the quick answer and I'm gonna be blamed
for being a cop-out again is that I
don't know when you write a novel when
you don't know you let the at a certain
point of time and this is true for the
Emperor and for the gene as well that
you let the book become your guide you
let the characteristic back to you
that's when particular in fiction but
also in nonfiction you have to once you
create them you have to let them speak
back to you and that's very important
you have to let the book speaks back to
this goes back actually to your question
as well to your question as well what is
the process if one of the processes is
is that you let the book speak back to
you let the character speak back to you
in the gene I didn't and it didn't know
when that book would end in fact the end
of the gene was read it in about four
times
because it when I felt that it was
ending I sent early drafts to maro and
we had a long conversation about it with
my editors etc and it fell to his had
hadn't ended in the right place and then
I realized it had to end in a particular
place
actually that and I'll tell you the
process and this will help you
understand what what science fiction how
to write science fiction I had an
instinct that the book had to end in a
particular place
which is not where it ended and very
late into the process I figured that the
book had to end where it had begun
in Calcutta with my father's visit and
then and and really I woke up with this
idea I had heard years ago and I don't
even remember how I remembered it I have
no recollection but I remembered this
snippet of a line from a great
musical piece by Kumar GaN have the
right heard years ago it would have been
a child and
he was singing you can find it actually
up if you're interested for you to it
you could find it on YouTube we got to
go back to it and there's a snippet of a
line in which he said in which he says I
translate you can read the original
show me that you can discriminate the
notes of a song
and
understand that the process of this
discrimination is the first thing that
we do translating you can read it the
chapter is called the aid of aid in the
book
but I suddenly woke up and realized that
this was the place that should end and
that's how I figured it out it was a
really a kind of I
understand finish writing this book I
understood now about 30 years after I
had heard the sign of this song the two
lines is a 30 years later I saw a figure
oh gosh I've begun to understand it it
took me 30 odd years to figure it out so
you let a book speak back to you I think
ultimately
Thank You dr. mukajee that was fantastic
just you spoken about sorry I'm not
anything you've spoken about human
emancipation you've spoken about the
liberation from suffering now I just
want to know so the flipside of that so
is there a happiness gene and can you
intervene and also at the moment in
India we are in great need for a gene
that will suppress arrogance so is there
such a gym right I wish there was I wish
there was but there isn't I'm sure there
isn't
I'll give you a gene for happiness if
you can define happiness for me how
about that
[Applause]
no no I'm very serious about it I'm very
serious it's not about you this in fact
you know I'm sorry but you've spoken
about emancipation
liberation from suffering you're spoken
about the precision of science you've
spoken about human emancipation so you
you can define happiness in you know
sort of maybe in five parameters or
something to say well I'm can you do
something but but the reality is that in
fact I think and this is an important
point and I write about this if you in
fact there's a whole chapter to some
extent dedicated to this it's the last
of the
manifestos in in in the book which is I
write this I say the human genome is
narcissus reflected
if you define a quality narrowly and if
that quality is heritable I can give you
a gene for it I'll give you an example
if you define
blue eyes
guys being blue and if you know that
that is heritable then I can give you a
gene for it if you define a quality
widely and if it's not heritable it's
very unlikely that I will be able to
gene give you a gene for it
and that's true across many things you
know
it happiness certainly fills that
criteria so I'm not this is not a
publication exactly I believe very
deeply in this idea that the narrowness
of the or the width of
the definition of a feature allows us to
determine whether that feature is or is
not
genetically
inherited if I
in an absurd world if I was to define a
beauty as only having blonde hair
sure I could find a gene for beauty but
that would be a world in which you and I
he would find may find non tenable
similarly if I were to say that
happiness is only having certain
parameters very narrow parameters of
success only being six foot three inches
tall I'm not so I would be unhappy by
those criteria but if I were to say
happiness is six being six foot three
inches tall sure I could find some
genetic correlates of that
arrogance I think sadly similarly
maybe arrogance can be more narrowly
defined than happiness
I'm getting exhausted so maybe they'll
get one more question
that my name is Shahid's you talked
about deep learning yeah and how
computers can
think like humans what computers get
cancer what would be akin
you know that's interesting idea could
computers get cancer you know up code
that evolves with learning
well you know we certainly know
computers can get infected
viruses and so forth
the computer computers get cancer but
you know they're learning algorithms
don't have a growth component to them so
in an evolutionary sense it would be
hard to imagine you know what good
cancer be without growth
but you're asking it differently perhaps
you know perhaps you could widen the
question the question could be could
could an algorithm become demented could
they have dementia and I suspect that
you could I suspect that there could be
reasons that your algorithms could have
dementia I suspect I don't see why not
if the nature of learning is a
particular way and if there is a decay
which is usually the case in dementia I
suspect that it's the interesting
question I suspect cancer would not be
the right place to go I suspect dementia
or having a kind of
psychosis could a neural network become
psychotic maybe
thank you very
much dad for this wonderful TV
[Music]